A map going on your Bloomberg terminal,
30-day [music] look.
Vessels, of course, on your screens in
blue. This is the Strait of Hormuz,
Persian Gulf,
Oman Gulf. Major exporting hub, of
course, in Iran, which was attacked on
the weekend. And some reporting today
that from Axios is that the US president
is weighing a seizure of
some other assets in that part of the
world. We're also getting some lines
coming through out of Dubai and the
international airport there being
temporarily suspended about 30 minutes
back. We're also trying to figure out
really what tanker traffic is really
like given a lot of reports, right? If
you're Chinese or Russian linked, you
get free passage or everything but
American and Israeli also get free
passage. On the Bloomberg terminal, you
do have some data on this. It's We're
looking at 24-hour rolling data every 30
minutes.
So, suffice to say if there's something
there that is visible that is moving,
then this might be able to capture that.
It's also worth pointing out, though,
that some of the tankers in that part of
the world have maybe turned off some of
their signaling mechanisms in order to,
of course, avoid There's a lot of
jamming that's taking place across GPS,
too. So, that's also affecting the
ability of folks to figure out really
where things are in real time. But,
based on our understanding,
it's effectively at about near zero as
far as tanker traffic is concerned.
Whether that's The orange line is
bidirectional. East to west is in blue,
west to east is in yellow. But again,
suffice to say the headline here,
Yvonne, tells you everything to know.
And you are getting a lot more efforts,
of course, on many sides to open up
traffic there in that part of the world.
>> And it's interesting to if you read more
from this Axios report of what President
Trump wants to do
when it comes to that export hub of
Iran, which it did attack. So, apart
from just asking for a coalition of
countries to reopen the Strait of
Hormuz, he also is also weighing a
seizure of the critical oil depot on
Kharg Island. This would be a move that
would require US boots on the ground,
according to Axios here. And if tankers
remain bottled up in the Persian Gulf,
so that's the latest on that front. Of
course, we have to take a look at what
comes to the impact on China, right? And
And most of the economists and you know,
China watchers that we talked to have
talked about, you know, China's efforts
to build out its energy sources is
actually getting fresh momentum from
this conflict in the Middle East. And
Beijing is one of the largest global
investors in power grids. And China was
the fastest growing LNG market before
Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2020
triggered a surge in spot prices. Yeah,
but Bloomberg Opinion columnist David
Fickling says there's a lesson to be
learned in Beijing's dash for gas. He
joins us now together with our reporter
Dan Murtaugh to talk us through this
complex issue right now. Um
David, let me start with you. Underscore
the the premise here for us.
Yeah, I I think this is looking at a I
was looking at a very specific case
really, which is
you know, some of the things that have
caused these blue skies around Beijing
in recent years. You know, you remember
like 10 years ago, there was a lot of a
lot of air pollution in northern China
especially in winter.
One of the things that's really changed
that is that since about 2017, there's
been
a lot of push for people in rural areas
to stop burning coal in domestic
furnaces to to warm themselves in
winter.
And that's pushed people in several
directions. One has been to
electric heaters and some to heat pumps,
but a lot of them have also been pushed
to gas boilers. And that's actually
caused real problems just in this past
winter. We saw quite a lot of reports
in in January with some of these rural
families. The they were initially
subsidized to to install gas boilers.
They were subsidized for the price of
the gas. And those subsidies have
gradually been removed because of course
a lot of local governments in China are
you know, facing a lot of fiscal
pressure. And that's left you know, some
of these quite shocking reports out of
you know, China 2026 where you've got
poor rural families who can't afford to
heat their houses who are
you know people who are having to sort
of stand outside in the midday sun to
get a little bit of warmth
and are just like having to rug up
inside with extra layers of clothing.
Now I think that was a real real mistake
because the the cost of heat pumps
essentially in a reverse cycle air
conditioners are not that much greater
for in all of these areas about 20%
and really a lot of people talk about
gas as this sort of bridge to
electrification. Um I I think we saw in
that Hebei winter gas crisis some of the
problems with that and of course we're
seeing spilling out of the crisis in the
Middle East some of the problems with
that much more broadly in the world.
Yeah David you certainly have
highlighted some of the challenges in
this whole transition. Dan maybe you can
step in and talk about how you know what
is being done now right this push to
expand China's energy infrastructure and
when it comes to capacity in the power
grid what efforts are being done now?
Yeah you know David's exactly right like
I think China has sort of realized
that it was too reliant you know it
requires about 50% of its gas to coming
from overseas markets about 70% of its
oil coming from overseas markets. So
it's really exposed to to any gyrations
in global prices
and now it looks at electricity which is
mostly coming from domestic sources coal
nuclear wind solar hydropower all of
which are you know produced in China so
it has a lot more control over the
prices and supply there. And so it's
been shifting its economy over the last
couple of decades toward more and more
electricity
mostly you see that in EVs but you know
you can see it out in the countryside
with these huge wind and solar farms and
that's all that is doing is requiring a
much stronger grip grid build out and so
you have these companies like State Grid
and Southern Grid that are backed by the
government and are
spending record amounts and selling
bonds for 700 plus billion yuan last
year to to raise the money to build the
power lines and the batteries that are
needed to to keep pace with all this new
electricity demand that's here in China.
Yes, so Dan, just to follow up on that.
So, you talked about financing. So,
clearly some of the SOEs have been
tapping the markets, whether that's the
banks or the debt markets. There's a lot
of money that's pushing through into
that. Talk to us though about the
challenges that remain despite all that
money being in place, really.
Yeah, I mean the big challenge is is not
building the infrastructure, right?
China's
got incredible power construction
companies. So, the long-distance power
lines, the battery storage plants, like
they can build those things at scale.
The challenge in China is really more
about under
the underlying market that dictates how
electrons are moved, where they go from,
how flexible the the supply can be with
all these new sources of wind and solar
that, you know, can be kind of anywhere
geographically, but only on at certain
amounts of time. And so, the real
challenge is going to be over the next
couple of years to see if China's
leaders can can kind of slowly reform
their market to create a more flexible
system without kind of
reducing any of the energy security
promises they've made to their
industries and people.
And David, you you talked about the
challenges.
Do you get a sense that there's policy
makers are trying to fix this any way?
And what's sort of the lesson to the
rest of the world right now when it
comes to trying to transition and make
this big transition?
Yeah, I mean I I think we I mean Dan and
I worked on a story a couple of years
ago about the big solar manufacturer
Tongwei. Their their
their founder, I remember
at the two sessions last year was
talking about, well, you know, if we
keep on this electrification process, we
can stop oil imports
within I think two decades, which is
obviously quite a long time. It's two
decades of oil imports. But for a
country the size of China, an oil
importer the size of China, Um, that
that's
the the scale of ambition that's uh
that's being talked about. Uh Um, and
certainly for China's exporting
industries as well, um, a lot of them
you're seeing a lot of like EVs and
solar panels going to emerging markets
that are still very dependent on on
fossil fuel imports. And we're going to
see in South South Asia, Southeast Asia,
a lot of exposure to the effects of of
the crisis we're seeing in the Middle
East. And China's standing there with
the products the sort of alternative
products to to fix that problem.